SOURCE: Ann Lay murder 2.gif
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

CRIMINAL SESSION,
MONDAY, June 2 1854
Ifis Honor, Chief Justice Stephen, took his seat on the
bench soon afier ten o'clock.
NEW BARRISTER.

Winntam Fox, Esq., was admitted a barrister to
practise i the Court, conditionally for twelve mouths.

The fullowing gentlemen were sworn on the Grand
Jury :—Messrs. J. W. Bain, D. Bura, de 8. Mae farlane,
W. Connell, A. Clarke, D. Nathan, J, Farmer, James
O'Neill, ‘L. Paton, J. Salmon, J. May, J. Woodhouse,
T. Williams MJ. Nixon, and W. 3S. Grabai, fore-
man, A. Kennedy, Esq. was fined £10 for non-
attendance. Toonas Litde, a witness, was fined £2
for not answering to his name, when called. He sat-
seqeently made bis appe rance.

Ilis Honor addressed the Grand Jury, congratulating
tem upon the lighness of the calender. With the
exeeption of one case of murder, (White’s,) and two
cases of rape, the other were of such ordinary character
as to eH for na particular wilusion,

‘The Attorney-General (Mr. Hox) prosecuted on the
part of the Crown.

JHE MURDER AT THE WADE.

John White was“arrnigned for the wilful murder of
Aun Fay, at Wade Creek, on the 13th May last.

‘The prisoner pleaded not guilty.

Uis ifonor addressed the Jury upon the solemn na-
ture of the obligation they were enterng into, in swear:
ing to reurn a true verdict according to the evidence
produced. He was irdueed to make these remarks, in
consequence of a elrcumsiance that had been brought
under his notice, and that had taken place after the
verdict upon a trial at the last session had been arrived
at, One of the jurymens, he was infraed, aad dis
tinetly asserted that be weuld not have agreed to the
verdict, had he known that the ful penalty of the bow
was to have been carried out. ‘Phat was, be would
have in reality perjured himself. The jury were not
sworn to adiminister the law, but to core to a true vere
diet according to evidence: if any of the present jury
were not prepared to do so, they might retire before
they were sworn. (None of the jury left the box. )

The Attorney-General brieily opened the case, and
ealilacd
