SOURCE: Ann Lay murder 1.gif
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

In our last, we chronicled the lealine partiontare
of this dreadful occurrence and the arrival, on ‘Thurs-
ay night, of the accused, in charge of the polce,
who also brought to town the body of the masdaed
woman.

‘The inquest was held in the Oda Fellows’ Avms, next
day (Friday) at 12 o'clock, before the Coroner and the fol-
lowing jury :—Messrs. A." Clark (foreman), MePherson,
Hewett, Stichbury, Walters, King, Hallamore, Macreally,
Bolous, MeCaul, Levy, Leech, MeGarvie.

The boily, which echibited two terrific wounds, one on
the lett side of the neck, nearly severing the head from the
trunk, and the other nearly dividing the left thigh having
been viewed by thejury,at the police guard room, the investi~
gation processed in presence of the accussd party. ‘Tae
first witness called was

Wm. Harris who, having been sworn, depored—I an a
settler residing at Wade Creck, about 20 miles from Auck-
Lind. Tknew the deceased for ahont four months, 1 saw
her last alive on Tuessay, the 13th instant, between throe
and four in the afternoon. On that evening, at or about the
above time, I saw a man called John, or Tinker, White,
approaching me. Ho was perfectly sober ; had an axe on
his shoulder, and asked me whether the woman had gone
vet; and Isaid, no. He asked me if he could see the
woman, saying,“ Cam not drank now." In a two in
tny honse there was the daceased ant another woman. I
and Wunte entered the house. The elder woinmm came
ont tous, White and myself called out to the deceased.
‘White asked the deceased whether she was going with
him or not? She said no: she had beew punished enough
hy him—had been half murdered by him hefore—and that
hor life was not safe with him. She said that when her
Alresses were finished she was going town, ‘The deceased
‘as under my protection from Friday, the 9th, up to the
sbove mentioned Tuesday. I hxd kept her under my pro-
tection because she told me that John White would murder
her, Dece wed way leaning with her arm on a dresser, and
ror side and hes leaning against the door jomb. Toh
White asked deceased whether she intended to go to town
or not She said. please Gad, I will go to-morrow. John
Wore asked me at this moment to get him some tobacco ;
as I was gomg.to get the tobacco, and hacl just taken a step
or two towards the door. T heard John White say, “I miy
at well be hnng for a sheep as a lain.” At this T turned
tay head round, and saw White wi. she full swing of his
axe in both his hands strike deceased on the neck, De-
ceased reeled, and fell on the floor of the room. A. second
or third blow followed, but I was so excited that I could
not swear as to where the other blows wage struck. John
White then turned round with the axe in his hand, and
said, © 1tis your tum next" I ran out of the room, fol
lowed by Winte, with the ‘axe in his hand. I jumped
down the verandah, and ran about fifty yards.still followed
by White, Finding that he was gaining on me, I tured
round, when he struck me on the left arm, inflicting a
serious injury, for which I have required surgical treat-
ment, After he struck me, 1 seized the axe ; we struggled,
and I fetl. Tat last got the axe from him. He then ran
away, To my knowledge he did not return to the house.

By a Juror (Mr. Hallamore)—Deceased was the widow
of tle late Patrick Fay, who was drowned in the Wairoa
river. Deceased told me that her object in going to town
was to lay an informatin against John White for drown-
ing her late husband. On my return to the house, after
White ran_away, I found the deceased lying on the floor
dead, I fainted from loss of blood in my arm. Whilst I
was faint my little son ran and brought a man called
Joseph Smith to the house. [Here an American axe was
produced and identified by Harris, as that with which
‘White struck deceased.] I gave the axe into the keeping
of Joseph Smith.

By another Juror (Mr. P. Levy)—Deceased had been
living with Smith for about four months, to the best of my
knowledge. White lived about five miles from my house.
Deceased eame to my house during the above four month
once, and then in company with White. This visit took
place about seven days before deceased met her death.
never had any quanel with White respecting deceased
My house 1s about three quarters of 2 mile fiom a house
called Mamice Kelly's. On Sunday, the 1ith, White
caine to my house. Ife was drunk. He went out to drink
with some thers, and T shut him out. He then took
Spade and threatened to break open ny door, the mien out-
side preventing him, He threatened me at the window
outside, saying he would be revenged—he would have
my hfe and hers too, Saw him on the following morn-
ing, passing my house; he wished me good morning. I
never saw him again until the above Tuesday evening.
T never visited deceased at her own house.

Robert Curtis deposed.—I a surgeon practising in
Auckland, have examined the body of deceased ex-
ternally. I found a wound on the left side of her neck,
avout five inches in length, separating the whole of the
vessels and museles on that side, und separating even
the bones of the neck, This would have caused instant
death, Ibeliove this wound to have been insieted
with a sharp heavy weapon. ‘The axe now produced
might have inflicted such a wound. also found an
extensive wound on the left leg, above the knee, separ-
ating the mtegements and muscles, and fracturing the
hone of the thigh.

‘Ann Scott having been sworn, deposed : I am house-
keeper to Wilhtam Harris, the tirst witness, Have
known the deceased about four months; saw her alive
on Tuesday Inat, for the last time, at 4 o'clock in the
afternoon; White came down to’ Harris's house at 4
o'dook, and asked for the deceased ; Harris and his
son were with him ; deceased and I were together in a
hied-room when White came into the house. I came
out of the bed-room and went into the kitchen. White
asked where Ann was, as he wanted to speak to her: I
called Uccensed ; che came out, and stood by the door ;
he was sitting by the front door with an axe in his
hhand j he asked the deceased if she would go back. with
him to Manice Kelly's and live there; she said she would
not ; she would not leave Mr. Harris's house until she
went to town, as she did not consider her life safe with
nim j tht as Soon as she was ready she wou'd go in the
boat, White made no auswer to this but asked aris
for the t-baceo ; they both rose from their seats : Harris
went to get the tobacco, and White made a blow at the
deceased with the axe.” First he made one blow but
Twas xo fiightened 1 could not say where he stuck
her; she reeled, and fell into the bed-room. He strack
her a second time; I went into the bed-room to try to
save her. I could not tellfif he gave her a third blow,
Wiute then swang the axe’ round, and said, Its your
turu now. Lid nyt know whether he meant this re-
mark forme or not Huis was in the aet of 1uoning
out of the trone door, wenn Whito followed him, with
the axein his hand. T dul nov see White str ike Hartisas I
stayed to put my hand oa deceased to see if'she was
dead, I then triid to run after Harris, bat fell on the
grass in a faint. When I recoveerd I tried to eail assist-
‘ner from another house but could noc make myself
head. I head a noise and went towards the place I
thought it came from. I found Harris lying on the
ground, with White and him struggling for the axe ;
Theard White say “if I let go the axe wi'l you strike
me with it." Harris said “No, if you will let me up.”
White let go the axe. and Harris got up. As soon as
he was up, White said “Now you go that way, and I'll
go this way,” and then he weit away. When I’ put
imy hand upon the deceased I found her dead,

Henry’Thomas Burnssworn, deposed. 1 ain a feneer for
W. Harris, the first witness. I live in his house; have dane
30 for five weeks, I have known the deceased for about
two months, Saw her last alive, at one o'clock on the
afteruoon of Tuesday last. On Saturday last. White
came down to Harris’ house, about 10 o'clock in the
morning and said to Hacis “Brammy, you have taken
my woman.” Harris said "No [have not, she has come
to me for protection.” White then asked Harris if he
would allow the deceased to come o xt and speak to him,
Taarris told the deceased that she could speak to White
iEshe chose. Deceased came from the bed-roomn into
the kitehen, leaning her arm against the dresser. White
asked her if she would come home; she said no, she
would remain where she was; she would get_mariied
toBrummy ; he would make her a good husband, and
she would make a good wife. White rose and was
going round the table, when Harris took deceased by
the arm, put her into the bed room, and locked her in.
Harris then turned round and told White that he wan-
ted no more row in his house, that 1f he would come
down oa Monday morning, he wonld fight him, for if
she was not worth fighting for she was not. worth ‘hav>
ing. White said that he would not fight for her then,
but that he wonld at some future peried. Harris snie
he did not mind ; he should be prepared. Farris. then
opened the bed-room door, when deceased came out, and
said to White “If you dont leave me alone, T will give
you 12 years as round asa robin; your life is in my
hands."” Deceased then re-entered the bel-room, and
locked herself in. After this White remained halfan
hour and on going he said to Harris “Brummy, you
have taken away my woman, and you will be sorry for
it.” On Sunday morning last, deceased asked me to
0 to White and tell him to leave her alone, as he was
the occasion of her husband's death, and that, if he did
not, she would swear her life against him. I went to
White and told hima what she had said, He said that
she could not hurt him, as thera wore two other men in.
the cance, when her husbaud was drowned. I thon
