SOURCE: Ann Lay murder 3.gif
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

Witfue Murder,

John White was indicted for having, on the 10th day
ot May last, feloniously, wilfully, and maliciously
murdered one Ann Fay, by striking her on the neck
with an axe,

The prisoner pleaded not guilty.

The following Jury was then empannelled :—John
Jones, Thomas Jones, Charles Joslin, John Lander,
Thomas James Jaggar, John Jackson, Edward Invine,
Thomas Jeffrey, Edward Lambert, John Jeffrey, Thos.
Jones, Alfred Jones (foreman),

Before being sworn, his Honor, addvessing the Jury,
said they were about to be empannelled in a charge of
murder, and would be sworn in the presence of their
God to return a true verdict aecording to the evidence.
He adopted this mode of affording an opportunity of
getting rid of that obligation to any one of the jurymen
who, in any after stage of the proceedings, might feel
disposed to perjure himself. It was a strange remark
to address to the Jury, and one which, but for recent
circumstances, he would not be called upon to make.
On a former occasion, he (the learned Judge) had been
credibly informed that a Jucyman had openly declared
that he would not have returned a verdict of guilty if he
known that the extreme sentence of the law would be
carried into effect. In other words, that he (the Jury-
man referred to) would have perjured himself had he
had known that the prisoner would be executed. He
would wish Jurors to understand that they were not
there as legislators—that their duty was not to say
what the law should be, but to administer the law as it
was, If they thought any particular law was unjust,
they might do what in them lay to get it altered, but so

| long as that law was deemed by the wisest of men to be
sound and politic, and especially so long as it was the
law of the land, so long was a Jury solemnly bound to
administer it, His Honor then offered to relieve any
juryman from his duties, who had made up his mind to
act in the same manner ag the juryman whose conduct
he had adverted to.

The Jury having been sworn,—

The Attorney General (Mr. Fox) stated the case for
the Crown, remarking that the facts were extremely
simple and extremely clear. Having recapitulated the
circumstances attending the commission of the deed, he
called the first witness, William Harris.

From the statement of this witness, made at the com-
mencement of his examination, it appeared that the
murder took place on the 13th, instead of the 10th, as
stated in the indictment. This involved considerable
delay, it being, in the absence of proper authorities, a
matter of uncertainty what should be the course to
pursue under such circumstances,

Ultimately, to remove ail doubt, a new indictment
was prepared, and sent in to the Grand Jury, who al-
most immediately found upon it a true bill.” The pri-
soner was then arraigned upon the new indictment, and
the same jury re-empannelled,

William Harris, Robert Curtis (Surgeon), Henry
Thomas Burns, and Ann Scott, were then severally ex-
amined. Their evidence was a re-capitulation of what
took place at the inquest, and need not be re-pub-
lished.

During the evidence of the first witness, Harris, the
axe by which the deed was perpetrated was brought
into court for identification, and was then carelessly
placed near the prisoner. It is believed that he was
about to grasp it, and add, perhaps, another to his list
of crimes, when the foreman of the jury called the
attention of the court to the circumstance, and the
deadly weapon was timeously removed.

The prisoner, who seemed ‘perfectly cool, cross ex-
amined the various witnesses, but on no point of conse-
quence.

The Attorney General did not address the Jury. He
said that the facts were in so smail a compass, and the
evidence so perfectly clear, that he thought it quite un-
necessary.

In course of the evidence, the following was handed
his Honor by W. S. Grahame Esq., foreman of the
Grand Jury, as a resolution that they had arrived at:—

Moved by W. Connell Esq., and seconded by A.
Clark Esq.,—'‘hat the facility with which licenses are
obtained for the sale of intoxicating liquors, in remote
country districts as well asin town, is a souice of great
and increasing demoralization and crime.”

His Honor, in receiving the resolution, said that
Auckland was certainly remarkable for the extent of
drunkenness that prevailed, The resolution would'no
doubt be published, and he trusted it would have “tha
desired effect, .

On the prisoner being asked whether he had anything
to say to. the Jury, he said that he had two witnesses,
John Cooper and Charles Brown, On being called,
however, they did not appear; He then made the fol-
lowing statement :—

When 1 went down to Harris's that day, I went in
with Harris, and we both satdown. I asked ‘for the
woman. She said, if I dared to touch her er William,
William would blow my brains ou:—that he had a pair
of pistols in the house—and that I must bea darned

scoundrel to come in when I knew they were there. I
asked William Harris what he was guing to do with the
pistols, He jumped up and pulled the pistol from be-
hind him. When I saw that, I dropped the axe and
ran. I saw Harris take up another axe, not the one I |
had, and pursued me with a dog. The dog caught me. |
Harris made « stroke at me with the axe. I closed with |
him and caught the handle of theaxe. In the struggle,
Harris fell. At this time Ann Scott came running up
with a large billet of wood in her hand—saying, hold
him, William, tillI get up. He said,2~zive me my axe,
