SOURCE: Clarks Auckland Star, Volume XXXVIII, Issue 291, 6 December 1907, Page 5.gif
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

EARLY SETTLEMENT.

ARAPOHUE PIONEERS.

. vi. |

he history of pioneering is always}

interesting, and much as we marvel at!
the coutage of those early colonists who}
settled in whav are now the chiefly|
populated portions of the Dominion, the |
palm for real pluck and grit must be}
awarded tb those, who, leaving the ele-|
ments of comfort, which although re-
stricted, did exist in a measure witif the
early townsman, braved the discomforts
and dangers of the practically unknown
bush country, and set out to carve in the
far north homes architectured on. the
lines of those they had left in the Home- |
land. Some fifty years ago the late Mr.
Palmer and his staf were engaged sur |
veying the Kaipara territory into sec-|
tions meet for the requirements of those |
colonists entitled to forty-acre grants.
They reported that the rolling country
on the eastern side of the Wairoa was |
specrally good for tillage, and that
though far removed trom the city the
benefits of the location would well re-
pay those who would take up the then |
distant lands.

In the early part of 1861, acting on the
advice of the Lands Department, « party
consistmg of Mr. S. Dodd, senr., ‘Thos.
Ruskell, Robert Douglas, and “Samuel
Green, set out from the then seat ot|
Government to view the sections. Leav-
img Auckland by small boat, they ‘pro- |
ceeded to Riverhead, where the Deacon|
fanily had already ‘settled. Even at!
that remote penrod Mr. Deacon had ¢s-|
tabhished what im after years became the
best known northern “hostelry. The
building was primitive, being built of
slabs, and one huge room furnished all
the AMeommodation required. A. large]
table down the centre was the chief
article of furniture, ‘whilst round the
walls were ranged open bunks, and one
end of the structure was used as a
Kitehen. Many tales are told of those
olden days when Deacon’s was a name
better known than Bellamy’s, and where |
wayfarers secured refreshments of 2|
most satisfying character. The party
walked from Riverhead over the ranges
to what was then known only as Kai
para, and where the town of Helensville |
how stands, At that time an open boat
made monthly trips from Mangawhare,
and it was by such that the lund seekers)
were conveyed to the Wairoa. They!
landed at Whakahara, where the Clark)
family bad settled. "From there they |
obtained a guide to the Arapohue block, |
and after ispection, Deng favourably
impressed with the quality of the soil,
relurmed to Auckland and took up those
sections which to-day are the properties
of their descendants. The sale price was |
slightly over ten slullngs per acre—to-|
day itis £10 and over. |

The Dodd family was the first to essay
the migration northward. They jour:
neyed from Auckland to Riverhead by
whaleboat. There the craft was hauled
asore aud placed upon a catamaran
for haulage to Kaipara. Two teams of
Dullocks ‘were engaged in tue task, for
roads were an wuknown quantity, and
the only passable route was by travers:
ing the erowns of the low ranges. More-
‘over, food supplies sufficient for at least
six months had to be carried, as the only
Wairoa store m existence was at Manga
whare, and the city supplies to wiuch
Mote startlingly penodic, “At Kaipara,
the party were met by Mrs. Dinah Clark
and her sons, and in their own and the
Clark's whaleboat, set out for their
new home. On crossing the Heads, an
overnight stay was made at Pouto,
Mhere sections of the Neatiwhatua have
resided for centuries. The natives were
jubilant at the pakeha immigfation, znd
prepared a special feast for the new
Arrivals. The following day saw the
new colonists landed on their section,
and no time was lost in erecting shelters
and in pushing on those improvements
‘necessary for comfort. Each succeeding
month saw the arrival of other settlers;
clearings quickly followed, and the mark
Jof the white man became indelibly im-
| pressed on the future history of North
Kaipara.

Some four years later it was decided
£5 open up a central track from the
‘Mititai landing to the back sections.
)A labour bee was formed by the Messrs.
Bradley, Maseficld, and others, and the
frst road in the Northern Wairoa dis-
trict was the results a roadway twelve
feet wide being cut through the Kahi-
katea bush from the ranges to the river
bank, “At that time, Mr, Dodd erected
'a sawmull on his property, and which
was the means of affording residents
‘the opportunity of acquiring material
|for the erection of comfortable resi-
dences. The logs were floated down
|from the upper reaches of the Wairoa,
land when converted into wide boards,
|sold for the princely sum of six shil-
|lings per 100 feet. The weekly cutting
jeapacity. of the mill was about. 30,000
feet, but as sales were spasmodic ‘the
machinery was only Worked as Tequire-
ments directed. After two years’ experi-
ence in milling. Mr. Dodd decided to close
down his industry and allow others the
opportunity. of amassing a fortune at
“the game,
| Wheat cultivation was an important
pursuit, and very fine wheat was grown.
There were no ploughs, no horses, the
ground had to be spaded, the grain was
reaped with hooks, thrashed with flails,
[and grounded in hand mills, To-day the
old settlers boast of having grown sixty
bushels of wheat to the acre, and pro-
vided Tour the equal of which is not
/to. be obtained in these days of roller
mills. Flour then was worth £30 per
tn, and as an indication of the high
prices of other houseliold goods it may
Be mentioned that the trade price of
| Kerosene was 14/- per tin.
| The first horse introduced into Ara-
‘pohue was a steed obtained by Mr. Sam
Bradley in 1865, and special tracks had
to be cut through the bush to permit of
its travelling to its new quarters. Its
Jadvent into the district caused as great
& sensation as would the arrival of the
Mauretania into Kaipara waters in these
days. For some years there was a
scucity of cattle.” A good cow. was
valued at £20, and young heifers sold
at £8 Freights trom Aucl land ere
exorbitant, ang if wan not t Il settlenient
took place at Helensville that cutters be-
gan to trade to tho Wairoa and settlers
wore enabled to get stock. As the coun-
try became opened the kauri bushes
were tapped, Bonner’s sawmill was ere-t-
ed at Aratapu, ond a brisk demand for
beef set in. Tt was found that cattle
throve remarkably well, the tender bush
feed being a prime factor for their
growth and mercase, and in time the
small grass pastiires were extended,
and every holding had its nucleus
of to-day"s herds. Good steers easily
sealed half a ton of beef, which
sold at sixpence a pound all
round, and hides brought thirty shil-
Tings. Sheep were unknown and did not
make their appearance till many years
later.

“Reports of successful settlement re-
sulted in the population being increased
