SOURCE: Nana's docs/Dick Dawes article002.jpg
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

i their parents, three boys, As he carried out his reasons were different. grains for other land. wait"heeaid
i Sam who died when just work of fitting the air Dick Dawes and other pdialpenk for other lagi mvait,’ he ald. |
seven years of age, Stan vents into the tunnel he unmarried menwereput © As well as a railway Ernie Dawes and Lee _
and Dick and three girls, moved to various loca- off to leave work oppor- ine the Dawes property (Foster) remember the
- | Queenie (Dysart), tions along the line in- tunities for the married aisohad the Kaihu Creek glorious aroma of food
t Gertrude (Sweet) and cluding  Pukehuia, men back from the first ining through it and cooking on the wood
, Cis (Paton). Queenieand Pikiwahine and Tan- World War. Dick 5 ea atae at range Ma was a real
Cis both live in Dar- gowahine. Where would a young oe eee os
gaville. Pikiwahine is on the mango to find work? hh lel ltt i
"My Dad worked inthe banks of Pighouse Dick was one of the |. ha -— lr
mill, we wenttoschoolat Stream just west of its lucky ones. His parents C=
Runaruna and after the Junction with the had a farm at a
First World War we ‘Tauraroa River,a feeder Mamaranui and had F '
moved to Kaikohe where Of the Mangonui River work for him there. ol
I got a job as the bread which feeds into the In the Easter of 1923 . wre
delivery boyforAdmore’s Northern Wairoa River. he purchased 114 acres ay ites
Grocery,” he said. At Pukehuia there was of land of which between i] % Di pes
: plenty of activity forthe 30 and 40 acres were * ee) ia ae P
This was the era of hard working Dick swampgrowing flax, and Pe) til oa Fe i:
horse transport so being Dawes. There were 20 Kahikatea. Clearing this | ; | eae '
a bread boy meant not single men’s huts and 30 left dozens of stumps and oH Me . -
only controlling the married men’s quarters, Dick says Trevor Moor- | og Ss.
horse but balancing a a post office, hall, store head went in with his ‘} SC
heavy machinery and ee! rr
: fe: cleared them out. ae hh ee
3 . "Not long ago we had The horse and cart grocery delivering at the
ing oe hissonJanupheredoing |Pukehuia Public Works camp during the building of
ge = some work for us," he |the railway.
££. said.
eo | ‘ C But backtothepioneer clearing this with - expert at making bread,"
tL Ee Ri! bined at MGS days of tracks for roads, _ believe it or not- a knife said Lee.
a es a horses the main form of and fork. Certainly not Then Ernie spoke
er wt eee transport and homes the domestic table about the homemade
Fa se REE TE EET OM ge . _.| that relied on wooden variety. Thiswerealarge butter, the junket and
“. .* “1 stoves for cooking and draining knife which he other milk dishes the
‘ a lanterns for light. used to slash away the family ate.
sas eee Asthe Dawes property weed and the fork was There was always
cleaned up, so the billy neededtotossthegrowth plenty of milk about,
can supply of cream _ ontothe river bank. along with fresh garden
ic a some naaee ‘: a vegetables they gathered
which no-one toda It w a i ,

When the trains travelled into Dargaville and| seems to be able to pe ae ies al ee aa ences Bee
back south again they passed by the Pukehuia} pjain, the milking shed echoed to the throb of a "Using the copper
railway station, which in those days comprised of} Was at one end of the motor milking machine Mum would bottle all the
a ticket office and goods shed. farm and the train stop and another nine years spare veges. After a few

. = years Mum and Dad
4A _ —— bought a _ canning

machine that was a lot

easier," said Lee, remem-

bering that they also

preserved the hen eggs.

"It was just a couple of
weeks ago that we got rid
of the last of the chooks,"
said Ernie.

Once a week the family
would go eeling at the
stream and this would
provide food for the table,
plus every now and then
Dick would shoot a rabbit
for a pie or casserole.

But they couldn’t live
entirely off their land.
Each week they had the

'Kaihu Butcher deliver
dian order and because
they didn’t have a fridge
_ the meat was hung in an
_outside safe to keep it
cool.
» In those days there
were grocery stores at
“Kaihu, Mamaranui and
Dargaville and the fami-
@ly had an arrangement
vith Mr Merrilees that
they would pay when
they were in town.

The Dawes family ini-
tially had a small cottage
but as the clan grew so

. did the house ,but only as
“quickly as Dick could af-
* ford to pay for the
‘materials.
