SOURCE: Nana's docs/Dick Dawes article004.jpg
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

eo. oe a e, years earlier but for Millat Pakotaitogetthe which picked iw. and. gine in the Hokianga:
ea & id a some reason we had to weatherboards. 7.30 in the ae rg in the Hokianga.
rains for other land- wait," he said. Today the houseserves dropped her back home “erry the Sierra. Recall-!
oo a a eeu dee the family base for at 4.30 in the afternoon. ing when driving an old:
_As ee! as a ral ey , rnie Dawes ~ tne Ernie and Beryl Dawes "I can remember my last Chevrolet car to Opononi:
at ote Kaiba Or i Aeoenate remem ff, . who have Dick living year at school when the the vehicle would:
ee iad the Kaihu Creek = giorious aroma of 100 4 with them. bus route was changed leapfrog across the none
gaping sone soe daggers the wood |. "He gual cookaithe and I had a straight trip surface, and into the,
ick was a master at range. Mum was a real meals," said Ernie, ad- into school instead being more distant past when:
won ding his Dad keeps him- car sick along the windy his grandfather had a;
. 4 we i ——- lls self busy aboutthe house back country roads," she brick works at Whirinaki:
SCC as well. ag outside prun- said. and provided bricks car-,
eee ._—=—_|_— ing the fruit trees and On the subject of rying the Dawes name. :
P wee.| doing odd jobs about the schools, Dick was among Among the snippets:
: ‘ place, listening to music, a group of locals who that emerged when talk-:
. des watching English com- gave a ot of voluntary ing with this interesting:
B tching English lot of vol i ith this i ing:
. edy, potteringintheshed time and skill when the man was that the Dawes:
‘ 4 oe and reading. "Ihave just comm unity’s school kiln provided the bricks:
o oo Pe ee a <a. started using glasses," swimming baths were for a fireplace in Hone;
Pe) ee a he said. built. Because he had Heke’s house. ‘
ly ied ae ‘As the house grew to served five years as a In 1984 Dick and Jean:
| y oy. oe 5 by meet the family needsso plumber back in those Dawes celebrated their.
| " Bena . did the milking herd. Public Works days he golden wedding anniver-:
| ‘4 } _ | Originally Dick milked had knowledge that sary and Jean passed:
| .. Slr | 25.cows by hand - today helped with that aspect away four years later.
—— eC = iin puts closer to 160 of ae 3b ie J on ty vo |
The h d cart deli i h through the shed. esays he di not have im, Dic awes, who.
Tbe horge and, cart grocery delivering, a the| “"Seked why the Dawes iota ume to give to hag 17 sande oot
the railway family didn’t have the in- community work but and P21 great:
a dependence of their own helped when he could. grandchildren, likes
clearing this with - expertat making bread," car rather than relying "The farm and the family nothing better than after
believe it or not-a knife said Lee. ” on the rail service, Dick took up all my time," he having cooked the eve-
and fork. Certainly not Then Ernie spoke said he did have car said, and it was Ernie ning meal to settle down
the domestic table about the homemade when Lee was a baby but who said, "Dad is a real with his cat Missy to
variety. This werealarge butter, the junket and after an accident at Mr Fix It. If you askhim watch the news of the
draining knife which he other milk dishes the Babylon when another he Iitell youhow tomend day.
used to slash away the family ate. car pushed him off the anything. If he gives ad- The Northland Field
weed and the fork was There was always road eerie damage he vice itisgenerally right. Days which began on
‘needed totossthegrowth plenty of milk about, could ili-afford to have He loves the land and Thursday interest him
onto the river bank. along with fresh garden fixed, the vehicle stayed family home, takesanin- greatly and he plans to
vegetables they gathered unused in the shed for terest in the improve- spend a little time there
It was about 1936 from their father’s huge the best part of a decade. ments son Ernie is catching up on the latest
when the Dawes farm garden When this incident making to the home developments. :
echoed to the throb of a “Using the copper, took place the infant Lee, 6cou
motor milking machine Mum would bottle all the ee eto sut of |
and another nine years gpate wagon Ah a fet the vehicle but was un-
oe tas that oeeeue ically Dick
machine that was alot splashed out on Moe
eed , ‘ord truck and put a
pein ee ee
"It was just a couple of tn me carly 1950s he
weeks ago that wegotrid went even further and
pe of the chooks," bought a Ford steel
Oo Poe the faded wheeled tractor that ran
wall go. an at the a ee : papieee
stream and this would | used the tractor for
Giaveven? pa ba thee seats as age
Dick would shoot a rabbit wad Bus toe SCrAD:. 28
for a pie or casserole. , i :
But they couldn’t live oe nities ate :
entirely off their land. yailable in their own
Each week they had the jocality. At one time
et See cer.
they didn’t have a fridge the ee eek ek
_ the meat was hung in an Mamaranui and they '
piside safe to keep it ;emember Mr Mitchen :
Nts ike deve bneee as being the headmaster.
ere grocery stores at When Lee was at
Raihu Mamaranui and school the standard five
Dargaville and the fami- and six pupils all piled on
Wly had an arrangement to the train every second
grith Mr Merrilees that Wednesday Ea:
they would pay when and went to Dargaville
they were in town. where the girls had half
a day sewing and half a
_The Dawes family ini- day cooking lessons
tially hada smallcottage while the boys learnt
but as the clan grew so woodwork. In the after-
§ did the house ,but only as noon they caught the
' oe as Dick pemeee Donnellys train home
’ ford to pay for the again.
' materials. Secondary school
