SOURCE: Nana's docs/Dick Dawes article003.jpg
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

NORTHLAND TIMES, SATURDAY, MARCH 1, 1997 PAGE 3
ing link to NW’s pi ing days
;
for the cream supply at :
the other.
: With the cows hand- : |
: milked, and pigs fed the :
: skimmilk Dick Dawes 7 :
7 would hoist the cream os ~.
can on to his shoulder ~~,
“,| and walk to the loading .
ramp for the supply to go
through to the cream fac- : i :
tory. ues 4 — 4. :
Having a railway line , a ® pes |. Bi 2,
™ go through the farm was . 3 - wy a
would stop between sta- eo te a i «4 ee .
tions and let the family Ts TE Oe i ‘os os 8 4 aie Sa
ien| alight but on the other ee eo aa) a mee 4 _ he Saige ae —
int] hand, in the summer | (iow (<3 Ste we yrds ey
8. there was always a fire Poo 7g a> _ os i. Sa A po i a a eee”:
-* risk with sparks from the ey Rasy ee Ux Cae Pinal e pee as a ae oo . ~
: coal burning engine. i ee eee ae ae 8 ee ee
alry —_In later years after his | < y Os ae “eg ae | ad Fa a 4 ae '
marriage to Jean | . % : ee Po cise oe yo wee :
¢ Thomas in 1934 andthe | c Ne ‘4 ee ‘oer 4 4 i oe et
ey arrival of their six | a ma tg 8 eee ee
ard Children, Lee, Una, | Jf | Sg gn ae Pee eee ee
lar Gloria, Josephine, Delia i | dt am, Joe ee ee i ak gle af A :
ited and Ernie it was the |. ir A ge oe 5 . re se
the Youngsters job to posi- |g ™ <n ame ee
Bee tion themselves with |Mg@j 1 eee ns ma erate aitecsee ak me Sa
ing sacks down by the line y ag oe, 2 eo a 7 Me | Wing ca, eee — ; >
n of and pat out any fires in Stl LO SS (RO REE | Dee OF le A a
. the dry grass. Ninety-year-old Dick Dawes from Mamaranui with his cat Missy.
ink Swamp land means se ee
ible ditch digging and this before electricity was put "I paid for every stickof meant a trip into Dar- farm, the leasehold and
are was something he did by on. timber as I went," he gaville and for part of the Parore run off,
ant hand. In fact he was so "The properties on said, recalling how he Lee’s time she had to He also spans the years
n8- efficient at thistaskthat, each side had the power would go uptoRamsey’s travelonthe Waihuebus back to when Selwyn
was when time permitted, he years earlier but for Millat Pakotaitogetthe which picked her up at Watkins put the first en-
the would go out and dig some reason we had to weatherboards.” 7.30 in the var og So gine in the Hokianga
ent. drains for other land. wait," he said. Today the houseserves dropped her back home ferry the Sierra. Recall-
her owners. as the family base for at 4.30 in the afternoon. ing when driving an old
gut As well as a railway Ernie Dawes and Lee frnie and Beryl Dawes "Ican remember my last Chevrolet car to Opononi
yr, line the Dawes property (Foster) remember the who have Dick living year at school when the the vehicle would
ied also had the Kaihu Creek glorious aroma of food with them. bus route was changed _ leapfrog across the rough
rst running through it and cooking on the wood "He still cooks the andIhadastraight trip surface, and into the
Dick was a master at range. Mum was a real meals," said Ernie, ad- into school instead being more distant past when
ing ding his Dad keeps him- car sick along the windy _ his grandfather had’a
¥ ie : self busy about the house back country roads," she _ brick works at Whirinaki
the | hg as well as outside prun- said. and provided bricks Cars
aS sheets ing the fruit trees and On the subject of rying the Dawes name.
at 5 ,.| doing odd jobs about the schools, Dick wasamong Among the snippets
pd i : f place, listening to music, a group of locals who that emorred when talk-
ee! / watching English com- gave a lot of voluntary ing with this interesting:
23 a edy, potteringintheshed time and skill when the man was that the Dawes
res he ie : and reading. "I have just community’s school kiln provided the bricks
en 4 mo iS ae started using glasses," swimming baths were for a fireplace in Hone
re b he) bbe mee he said. built. Because he had Heke’s house.
ind . Pee cn As the house grew to served five years as a In 1984 Dick and Jean
his ° & : es meet the family needsso plumber back in those Dawes celebrated their
pe A Dita eae. | did the milking herd. Public Works days he golden wedding anniver-
iy rat [| Originally Dick milked had knowledge that sary and Jean passed
his eS” lm : 25.cows by hand - today helped with that aspect away four years later.
gl pa Ernie puts closer to 160 of the project. With 90 years behind
eo , ae through the shed. Hesayshedidnothave him, Dick Dawes, who
ad The horse and cart grocery delivering at the Asked why the Dawes aa lot of time to give to has 17 grandchildren
ng |Pukehuia Public Works camp during the building of family didn’t havethein- community work but and iD great
he | the railway. dependence of their own helped when he could. grandchildren, likes
: ; ; ‘ d," car rather than relying "Thefarmandthefamily nothing better than after
er clearing this with - expert at making bread, on the rail service, Dick took up all my time," he having cooked the eve-
i. Oe tek eee ar Bidic spoke aid ba de have car said, and it was Ernie ning meal to settle down
of and fork. Certainly no en Er ‘qt is'acreal : ; :
es the domestic table about the homemade when Lee was a baby but who said, "Dad isa real with his cat Missy to
