SOURCE: Nana's docs/Dick Dawes article001.jpg
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

e 9 e e ‘
Dick Dawes - a living link to NW
Talk about the bush “he Jeuny Cocurio
clad hills of the Northern = ser lhe we
recently celebrated his | a i “ “Ge With the cows hand-
90th birthday can a. ON : 5 milked, and pigs fed the
remember them, men- | ™& eg eg skimmilk Dick Dawes
tion the building of the “ ae oe 3 would hoist the cream
ee so. 2 an | can on to his shoulder
Works gang carrying bie | re 5 p wa[_ and walk to the loading
ie wareueat eT Senate eevee
See oui H dit plane et dae . re pee line o
he has called home since ; Pete eg oe sald Bou aa el is a ares
1923. U a ee . ee eee me . ane dai ers ‘ y
To put that date into ee cm a ce e ~~ ie bald tn Tececece ie _
perspective 1923 was the ' GIP re a! tions andl lab the family ag fF
year the municipal This was the accommodation offered the men alight but on the other [ae as
bt tieah ite working for the Public Works. It comprised a tent| hand, in the summer 7 oe at f
OP ee VORA eev ie. | Houde with communal outdoor cooking facilities. there was always a fire Pee 2g 4
library were built and risk with sparks from the dd 4 i Poe
the year the North Auck- huge wicker bread bas- and wharf. Bread was Boal caput engine Pi ge «44
land Electric Power ket on one arm. delivered via the dairy yy jat afer his od Resi i
Board helditsfirst meet- His route included company’s steamer, ee or vagal Sean i Ne
ing, even though Dar- serving the rural areaas Pioneer. Tee lage ie ce .- =
gaville was still without well as the town and he During the building of seeival Bae eee Mie 7-2”, cal
electric power. was expected to be atthe _ the railway, the workers, children, Lee, Una, |) | o¢@ a
Two years later the door with fresh baked super fit from their hard Gictin losaphine Delia ei es
first bridge across the bread regardless of the manual work, mounted ak : . as the | i or fae
Northern Wairoa River weather. sporting teams in anum- an tens SB oton csi iy Na
was opened. After a couple of years ber of disciplines the Y2 an J 1 Sere Cae i. A
Christened Henry Dick moved out to work most noteable being ue ae hee teas if ee ae
Charles he has been on the Omana tunnel rugby and the origin of Aad pat out ary fires i, | ee oo
knownas both Harryand where he was part of the Pukehuia Shield. th a ee tere oe ‘ ;
pick the latter being be- Gillespie's Pipes crew. People today think * Swkup land shean lc Ninety year-old Dick
cause ne hadtreckleslike They made chimneys employment is unstable. aeoaes : 5 at '
Dick Sneddon. ae ed and eadin so he was om coe ewan if they are Oona oe aoa pefore electricity was pu
His family, which lived ofthe lucky ones not ad- made redundant jand In fact He wasso. "Th ti ;
at Runaruna near versely affected when through restructuring. a ohatthia taahehet e phe 0
Kohukohu, on the the winter weather set Back in those daysit was “tcient at this tas ‘ es each side had the powe
Hokianga, comprised jn, much the same but the eae eaigpate: Pane Carded ae
their parents, threeboys, As he carried out his reasons were different. ee oe eae Rake Sait be suid pee
Sam who died when just work of fitting the air Dick Dawes and other a. Big kc cee:
seven years of age, Stan vents into the tunnel he unmarried men were put As well as a railwa: Ernie Dawes and Le«
and Dick and three girls, moved to various loca- off to leave WOrK Oppor- “jin the Dawesipr: nt (Foster) remember th«
Queenie (Dysart), tions along the line in- tunities for the married 7. a hi dike heb ee lorious aroma of fooc
Gertrude (Sweet) and cluding Pukehuia, men back from the first 79002 ae me it and Sain on the wooc
Cis (Paton). Queenieand Pikiwahine and Tan. World War. iakine: on ter at range on was a rea
Cis both live in Dar- gowahine. Where would a young —~~ “8S 4 mas ew
gaville. Pikiwahine is on the mango to find work? ; oo =
"My Dad workedinthe banks of Pighouse Dick was one of the |. Po a :
mill, we went toschoolat Stream just west of its lucky ones. His parents I
Runaruna and after the junction with the had a farm. at i
First World War we Tauraroa River,a feeder Mamaranui and had F r ee
moved to Kaikohe where Of the Mangonui River work for him there. ol ; é
I got a job as the bread Which feeds into the In the Easter of 1923 | eee ae
: , Northern Wairoa River. he purchased 114 acres a
delivery boy for Admore’s ; : :
Grocery," he said. At Pukehuia there was of land of which between o : s
plenty of activity for the 30 and 40 acres were ® ry ae
This was the era of hard working Dick swamp growing flax, and PS ee Minn)
horse transport so being Dawes. There were 20 Kahikatea. Clearing this os m ie ee,
a bread boy meant not single men’s huts and 30 left dozens of stumps and " Wane ‘ (of ae
only controlling the married men’s quarters, Dick says Trevor Moor- i . te} es
horse but balancing a a post office, hall, store head went in with his : oe
heavy machinery and er
fer cleared them out. el
: Ee "Not long ago we had The horse and cart grocery delivering at the
ti a hisson Jan up heredoing | Pukehuia Public Works camp during the building of
~~. >. ee some work for us," he |the railway.
oe... SS said SS ee 5
~~. o . : Butbacktothepioneer clearing this with - expert at making bread,"
| ee .F boat eet | days of tracks for roads, _ believe it or not- aknife said Lee. 4
oe (s--© | horses the main form of and fork. Certainly not Then Ernie spoke
ow Fee eo sis amma, | transport and homes the domestic table about the homemade
nae me rome. LOO hee : that relied on wooden variety. This werealarge butter, the junket and
i . | stoves for cooking and draining knife which he other milk dishes the
: lanterns for light. used to slash away the family ate.
