SOURCE: Graham, William - mentioned in article re conservative Quakerism.png
METHOD: automatic OCR (tesseract), unchecked. Handwriting will be unreliable.
DATE: 2026-10-10

‘Second-experience holiness was the driving force of the American Quaker
revival. But it was a movement that never achieved the same power among British
Friends. There was some interest in it in the 1870s, largely because of the work of
the American Friends Robert Pearsall and Hannah Whitall Smith. Yet the doc-
trine apparently held little appeal for Friends in London and Dublin Yearly
Meetings. More conservative Friends saw the results of the American Quaker
revivals as anything but holy or sanctified, and even more sympathetic Friends
held to the older Gumeyite formulation of sanctification as a second but gradual
experience. The great engine of the American revival found little fuel among
British Friends.*

‘As we noted carlicr, British Priends were interested observers of the American
revival, and many were supporters of it The weighty Friends who dominated
London and Dublin Yearly Meetings insisted on recognizing the revived bodies as
legitimate Yearly Meetings when separations took place, and hailed what they saw
as an advance of the Kingdom. But a determined group of more traditionalist
Friends were unrelenting in their criticism: Daniel Pickard, William Irwin, Charles
Thompson, Joseph Armficld, and William Graham, the editors of the British
Friend, as well as some unexpected allies like Tallack. As early as 1873, Graham
commented, with atypical restraint, that: ‘He should be ghd if American Friends
could sober down’. As the revivalists advocated the pastoral system, the attacks
became more heated. Consider, for example, Thompson: ‘It scems to me high
time this “conspiracy of silence” on the part of English Friends was abandoned,
and that we should cease to hold official intercourse with those American Yearly
‘Meetings in which such practices are encouraged and testify against them’, he
‘wrote in 1890. ‘This may be the only method now left to us of protesting against
a retum to. those pre-arranged, formal, man-ordained systems of public worship
OUT OF WHICH our forefathers were led’. But by the 1880s conservatives were
finding support from the rising generation of modemist Friends. William Pollard
and Francis Frith, co-authors of the modernist manifesto, A Reasonable Faith, were
equally pointed in criticizing the movement of American Friends toward a profes-
sional ministry. And in the 18%0s they were joined by young liberal Friends such
as John Wilhelm Rowntree and John William Graham’?
